Subject: Request for a phone conversation to discuss past submission (proposal #1653050)Dear Drs. Peters and Qidwai,<p>I submitted the proposal titled “CAREER: A New Phase Field Based Fracture Mechanics Theory for Understanding the Origin of Toughness Enhancement in Bio-inspired Materials with Intricate 3D Interfaces” to the MoMs program last year in response to the 2016 NSF CAREER  call (solicitation #NSF 15-555). I am attaching a copy of that proposal to this email.</p><p>As you are aware, my proposal was declined. I am appending the panel summary (titled _Panel Summary_) and the reviewer comments (titled _ Reviewer #1, #2, etc ._) to this messagel. Two of the reviewers' rankings were "Very Good", one was "Very Good/Good", and one was  "Good".  The primary message I took away from the panel summary and the reviewer comments was, as stated in the panel summary, "<s>_</s>Some of the panelists felt that the augmentation to the PFT may not work, but also felt that the fracture patterns could be calculated with conventional methods such as<span style="color:blue">,</span> XFEM <s>of CZ_</s><span style="color:blue">,or CZ</span>. </p><p>I have considered the reviewers' comments very carefully. Since receiving those comments in January, 2017, I have carried out a substantial amount of additional preliminary-research in order to address the  reviewers' concerns. <span style="color:blue">What is the additional premilinary-research?</span> Based on the results of this additional preliminary-research, I believe that I have rectified the primary short comings of the proposal identified by the reviewers. <span style="color:blue">How did you address the short comings?</span> In fact, the additional research has convinced me even more that the investigation proposed in the proposal is indeed quite important and timely. For that reason, I would like to seek your advise on whether or not it is a good idea to re-submit a modified version of this proposal as a regular proposal in the coming full proposal window (Sep 1-15, 2017 window). </p><p>I would be very grateful <s>to you </s>, if either of you could advise me on what you deem is the right direction for the future of this proposal. Any advise from you would be very valuable to me. My cell phone number is 347-753-1573.</p><p>Best wishes, <br>Haneesh</p>**Proposal Number:** 1653050### **Panel Summary:** Panel Summary  Objective: It is proposed to develop enhancements to the phase-field theory (PFT) of fracture, with the ultimate goal of applying this to the study of the origins of toughening in structural biomaterials. Intellectual merit Strengths: The panel felt that this was a well-written proposal, even if the numbering scheme was somewhat esoteric and confusing. The PI presents a systematic plan to develop an enhancement to the PFT, and follows this with mitigation strategies should this enhancement fail. An interesting application of the method to the study of toughness in hierarchical structures in spicules is also discussed. Weaknesses: Some of the panelists felt that the augmentation to the PFT may not work, but also felt that the fracture patterns could be calculated with conventional methods such as XFEM of CZ, and therefore the analysis of the spicule fracture can proceed even without the PFT. Additionally, some of the parameters of the model do not appear to be obtained through proper calibration experiments. Broader impacts Strengths: The educational activities were well described, with good integration of the PI's efforts with the 'Sci-Toons' and SPIRA programs of the University. Weaknesses: The panel did not discuss any weaknesses. Panel Summary Statement The proposed effort is a combination of development of an enhanced computational simulation tool for modeling complex fracture patterns and for determination of the origins of high toughness in structural biomaterials. The PI should carefully evaluate alternative simulation strategies should the PFT fail. The panel has read and is in agreement with this summary as an accurate reflection of the panel discussion.<br><br><br>### Review #1**Rating:**: Multiple Rating: (Very Good/Good)**REVIEW:**In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to intellectual merit. The proposed work focuses on developing a new phase field theory (PFT) that includes crack broadening effects for describing and understanding origin of fracture toughness enhancement in bio-inspired materials. The title of project says bio-inspired, yet the body of proposal is focused on biomaterials. Bio-inspired materials do not yet necessarily have fracture toughness enhancement. But biomimetic materials do. The key advancement that is offered is not only in PFT but also its ability to simplify 3-D crack propagation. Hypothesis seems to be that PFT in 3D will help identify the origin of toughness. In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to broader impacts. New innovations include Sic-toons for multi-media work, SPIRA for diversity-outreach and interactions with local students. Please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to any additional solicitation-specific review criteria, if applicable Summary Statement The key idea is focused on PFT use for 3D and the use of PFT to identify mechanisms that will lead to new design of materials, a promise each bio-inspired materials research offers. The novelty is very limited in the proposed research.<br><br><br>### Review #2**Rating:**: Good**REVIEW:**In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to intellectual merit. The PI proposes to develop a new phase field fracture theory (PFT) that can be used to simulate the fracture behavior of "structural biomaterials." According to the PI, PFT can handle more complicated situations of crack propagation such as crack branching and merging than other computational techniques. The reason to focus on structural biomaterials is that these material exhibit high fracture toughness and could serve as an inspiration for man-made materials.  To accomplish this, there are several steps that will be taken. The first challenge to address is the effect of "broadening" that is a non-physical attribute to PFT, according to the PI. Even though the terminology "broadening" is used several times, the PI keeps the reviewer in suspense until the bottom of page 5 where a few paragraphs describes the term. The PI says that "a crack by definition has zero thickness" but that PFT has a non-zero thickness. This can cause inaccurate results. The PI proposes to solve these by introducing information about the crack orientation, and "degrade only the bonds that are normal to the crack surface." Once the issue of "broadening" is resolve, the new and improved PFT will be compared to experimental observations. Once verified, the new PFT will be used to study wavy interfaces. If the project is successful, a new computational tool could become available to use in fracture mechanics simulations. There are several issues that are unclear and could benefit from a better presentation. The discussion was sometimes hard to follow. Many times the equations that are included in the text are unclear and the reader must draw his or her own conclusions. The PI should consider that reviewers typically are experts in the general field but not in the particular field that is being discussed. Even though it is good that the individual research tasks are broken down into sub-section, there are no headings for the individual tasks. Rather than describing the tasks, the PI keeps referring them via acronyms such as Sro.1, T1.aii etc and it is very hard to keep track of what is being proposed. A lot of information are also hidden in the very compactly explained figures; I view that as a way to get around the maximum page numbers and minimum text size. In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to broader impacts. The broader impact lies within the educational efforts. These will involve the "Sci-Toons initiative," the SPIRA, and mentoring students in the PI's lab. The Sci-Toons initiative involves producing animated videos that will communicate the importance and impact of the PI's work to non-scientists. The success of this will be evaluated based on the number of views the videos get at for example YouTube. SPIRA is a camp for high school girls hosted by Browns University during the summer, inspiring them to purse a college education in engineering. Please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to any additional solicitation-specific review criteria, if applicable Summary Statement The PI seems well qualified to perform the tasks and appears to have the resources needed. However, there are some shortcomings as outlined above that the PI might consider if the proposal is not funded.<br><br><br>### Review #3**Rating:**: Very Good**REVIEW:**In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to intellectual merit. The PI wants to explore a theory that can explain the unique fracture features that structural biomaterials possess, including, both high strength and high toughness. These materials are heterogeneous, and consist of a ceramic and an organic phase mixed together in intricate 3D patterns over a range of length scales. To understand this fracture behavior the PI wants to address several questions including specific architectural motifs and how they enhance fracture toughness. He also wants to focus on interfacial strength and complex hierarchical nature of such structures. For this purpose the PI proposes to develop a new (modified) phase field-based fracture mechanics theory that would enable accurate and robust computer simulation of the failure behaviors of such materials. The proposal is well written Actually, the research is a continuation of the work that PI is currently conducting. One question of concern is the suggested use of fitting parameters in the models to match experimental data. In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to broader impacts. The educational and outreach activities are well described. The idea to produce a Sci-Toon animation that uses "jargon-free" language and communicates in a storytelling style is good. Please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to any additional solicitation-specific review criteria, if applicable Summary Statement This is a very good proposal and the PI is highly qualified to conduct this research. The model is well described, however, the incorporation of the physics obtained from experiments in the model is not very clear.<br><br><br>### Review #4**Rating:**: Very Good**REVIEW:**In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to intellectual merit. What: The main research aim of the proposed effort is to investigate structural biomaterials with a view of extracting underlying principles for material design. The educational plan consists of translating research outcomes to videos and programs that can serve as tools for public education and outreach. Why: This proposal derives motivation from biological structures, under the premise that ability to mimic such designs would permit development of high-toughness materials. How: The PI proposes to develop the phase-field theory (PFT) of fracture to be able to address complex fracture pattern formation, and to assess their influence on the overall structural integrity of materials. In addition to this, a specific biological system (E. aspergillum spicules will be studied through detailed modeling of its architecture. Finally, different interfacial models will be studied to examine optimization of toughness. Strengths The PI has a good background in the area of micromechanical characterization and computational modeling of materials. An integrated program is proposed that begins with combines numerical tool development, and study of specific architectures. There are a few basic, but important questions concerning design principles that are raised; answers to these would be of importance in guiding material design. The educational plan includes integration into the University's program for public science education through the 'Sci-Toons' videos and the summer camp for girls. Weaknesses The whole effort hinges on the proposed developments in PFT. The proposed solution to the problem of broadening of damage is fraught with problems. Many different partitions of the energy u? into deviatoric and dilatational parts, positive and negative strain contributions, etc have been proposed and used successfully; the proposed partition into the crack parallel component could be troublesome. However, it appears that the PI has proposed some alternatives should this first effort fail. Also, questions posed could be answered without this development, using conventional XFEM or cohesive zone based modeling strategies. In the context of the five review elements, please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to broader impacts. This program will contribute to the development of an educated workforce; involving undergraduate and graduate students in science and engineering research will provide a long term broader impact. Integration of the research outcomes into the University's program for public science education through the 'Sci-Toons' videos and the summer camp for girls is an innovative activity. Please evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the proposal with respect to any additional solicitation-specific review criteria, if applicable Summary Statement This proposal aims to develop guidelines for bioinspired design of materials using E. aspergillum spicules as an example material. In order to study the complex fracture patterns, the phase field method would be enhanced permitting exploration of the origins of toughening in hierarchical materials. The broader impact includes development of public science educational materials and summer camp for girls.